 Robert Gutierrez 
March 3, 2014 
you are are a diabetic and you have to give yourself shots of insulin and be careful what you blood sugar is stabilized you also have to be careful what and when you eat. I'm eating at Chase and first year here.
	Today as I wake up I'm eager to start my day.  College is the
experience I have been hoping for, branching off from home and leaving my house has made me feel as a complete grown up. As I'm walking into the dinning hall I notice the food and immediately, it hits me,  that my mom was not here to cook for me. Which meant I had to be extra careful with the food that I ate.  I saw my friends serving themselves chocolate chip pancakes, and immediately started to fantasies about chocolate chip pancakes.  It had been years since I'd had them, and the syrup seem delicious.  Then I pondered about my situation and remembered I was not carrying my insulin shot.  Not a clever move.  I decided to leave and dismissed from my friends without mentioning anything, as I did not want to make a big deal about it, or seem like an outcast. As I went back to my room I searched for my shot and wondered where to my insulin case was as I had not used it as much before.  I placed it in my bag and then took off, back to the dinning hall. 
    Before walking in I began to realize the lack of nutrition, there was.  Syrup and chocolate chip was not something I hadn't eaten before and with good reason.  Therefore, I decided to take a plate of toasted wheat bread and a variety fruits, that I knew it could not harm me.  As I walked to the table, all my friends began to  question where I had run off too.  Of embarrassment I replied that I had forgotten my textbook for class. Instantly made everyone laugh, They snickered "It's the first day of school." I agreed I had over exaggerated.  As I walked to class I began to question, my life at Wheaton, and the barrier I had to overcome.  I did not want to feel like I was some sort of special needs person that had to watch every little small detail.  However it was necessary for me, unless I wanted to take an insulin shot out in public, which people would think of me as a strange person. Not the reputation I was looking through my college career.  
As time went by I began to build a list of the possible foods I could eat.  I looked at the list and notice that there was some options to pick from.  I was content for some time then after a couple months I had noticed the food repeating and began to dislike the food served.  Slowly realizing that my options in reality were limited. For some time I dealt with it and got off campus and managed to deal at near by restaurants. This was all nice and dandy, yet as soon as I ran out of money I began to face my fear, and began starving myself for the lack of options.  As time went on I began learning to cook small dishes that I could easily managed to make while at school.  This is was a great alternative, yet continue to see that I ended up spending a lot of money on raw supplies as well.   


** Brain Storm ---- what else to add to this paper: 

   the process of how I tried different method
   getting sick --- an actual insulin experience  
   friends are there to help and found out I was not the only one 
    
   the solution to my problem 